[Index](index.html) | [Getting Started](gettingstarted-v10.html) | [Guides](vok-guides.html)

# Translating Your App

Internationalization, Localization, I18n, L12n, or translating your app to different languages.
VoK provides basic support for localizing of your app. It provides the `vt` map which simply
translates keys to strings. For example:

```kotlin
textField(vt["newuser.name"]) {
    bind(binder).bind(Person::name)
}
textField(vt["newuser.surname"]) {
    bind(binder).bind(Person::surname)
}
```

> `vt` stands for Vok-Translate and was chosen because it's much easier to type in on the keyboard than `i18n`.

In order to provide values for the localization keys, you need to create a so-called resource bundle
(a map of keys to values) named `VokMessages.properties` in the `src/main/resources/` folder of your app.
An example of such file would be

```
newuser.name=Name:
newuser.surname=Surname:
```

To provide localized resources e.g. for your Japanese customers, just create another file named `VokMessages_ja.properties`
(also in the `src/main/resources/`) folder, with the following contents:

```
newuser.name=名
newuser.surname=姓
```

Now your Japanese visitors will be welcomed by a familiar Japanese text.

> *Note:* VoK localization support uses Java `ResourceBundles` underneath. Please consult
[About the ResourceBundles](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/tutorial/i18n/resbundle/concept.html) for information on how to name
the `VokMessages_*.properties` bundles to provide a proper localization for particular country.

It is always good to keep the `VokMessages.properties` file. That's a so-called fallback file - if a resource bundle for a particular
language doesn't exist, the fallback bundle will be loaded. You typically write youor fallback bundle in English,
but you may also use other language, depending on the target audience of your app.

> *Note:* if the key doesn't exist in the bundle, it is wrapped in `!{}!` and returned. For example,
`vk["newform.nonexistent"]` will return `"!{newform.nonexistent}!"`

## How The Language Is Selected

The `vt` function retrieves the proper localization map based on the locale of the current UI: `UI.getCurrent().locale`.

> `Note:` the function fails if there is no UI (the function is not called from Vaadin's UI thread). You
therefore can't call it from e.g. a background thread.

To configure the current user locale, just compute a proper locale based on the steps below and then call `UI.setLocale`.
With Vaadin 8 app, you can set the locale directly in the `UI.init` method; with Vaadin 10 you can set the locale also in `UI.init`
method or in the constructor of your root layout class.

* As a first step, you can check whether the user has configured his language in his settings. Just get the current
user from the session, then do a database lookup for the user settings and retrieve the locale. If it's not null, use it.
* If user haven't configured his locale or your app doesn't support this kind of functionality, fall back and simply poll the browser
for the `WebBrowser.locale`: Vaadin 8: `Page.getCurrent().webBrowser.locale`, Vaadin 10: `Session.current.browser.locale`.
* If the browser provided `null` locale, fall back to `Locale.ENGLISH`.
* Set the value computed by the steps above to the UI: `UI.setLocale`

## Standard Bundle

In order to provide localization for filter components, Vaadin on Kotlin provides a standard bundle placed in the `com.github.vok` package.
This bundle is internal and shouldn't be overridden. It provides the following defaults:
```
filter.all=All
filter.clear=Clear
filter.ok=Ok
filter.set=Set
filter.atleast=at least
filter.atmost=at most
```

You can add these definitions into your own `VokMessages.properties` bundle - they will then be preferred over the
default ones. This way, you can provide alternative translations (or additional translations) for the filter components.

## Customized Solutions

The built-in VoK localization support may not be powerful enough for your needs. VoK doesn't limit
you in this regard: you are free to use a customized solution based on
[ResourceBundles](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/ResourceBundle.html) (the
typical solution for a JVM-based apps), or you can even
roll your own completely custom solution for translating strings.
